---
layout: post
title: "Permutation & Combination: The Ways to Do Them All"
categories: Maths
---
How many ways can you arrange an apple, a banana and a carrot?

Well, labelling them as A, B and C respectively, there are 6 ways of arranging them: ABC, ACB, BAC, BCA, CAB and CBA. That was easy. You would have just listed all the possible arrangements and counted them all. But what if now we have 4 different objects? Or 5? Or perhaps even more? You could list out all the possible arrangements, and count how many of them are there altogether, but that would be inefficient, especially once the number starts to get really big (unless you have as much spare time as you want, then by all means do that). 

Mathematicians, of course, throughout the centuries have developed ways and functions to help us solve problems like this. This field is known as Combinatorics, the study of how to group and combine a finite number of objects together. The topic of Combinatorics can even be a fun thing you could do as leisure, as I personally do when I’m bored. Once you learn the ways of Permutation and Combination (P&C), you can apply them whenever you feel like it, from finding the number of ways you can create code words from a set number of letters, to the number of ways to sort your sock drawer, to finding out the number of possible lottery number combinations.

But first, let’s look at the most simplest function that’s used quite extensively in P&C: The Factorial.    

Going Down the Factorial Chain
The factorial is a function that really brings out the excitement in people who try to write it out: This is the factorial! Really, that’s the factorial. The factorial is just an exclamation mark (!). But what does it do? Well, inserting a number into this function outputs the product of all the whole numbers smaller and equal than it until 1. So for a non-negative whole number n, which means including 0, n! is n(n-1)(n-2)(n-3)...(3)(2)(1). So 2! = 2×1 = 2, 3! = 3×2×1 = 6, 4! = 4×3×2×1 = 24 and so on.

But why is there the inclusion of 0? How can you get 0! If there’s ‘no number below it’? Well, this is because of how the factorial can be recursively defined. Said out, factorial is the multiplication of all the whole numbers from n until 1, but formula-wise it can also be written as n! = n×(n-1)!, which is n multiplied with the previous number’s factorial.

 

So inputting n=1 inside, we get 1! = 1×0! And since 1! is well defined by the factorial, for the equation to be balanced and without contradiction, 0! = 1! (it can a factorial symbol or an exclamation mark, both are equally exciting in this case)

But what does this have to do with arranging objects? Well, suppose you have 4 distinct objects and you want to arrange them all in order. The first space can be filled in with any 1 of the 4 objects, so only 3 left. The next space can only be filled with 1 of the remaining 3, and the 3rd space with 1 of the last 2, and the last space filled with the last. So 1 of the 4 different objects can be first, each choice branching out into 1 of the 3 next, branching out again to 1 of the 2, then finally 1. So the total number of arrangements that can be made is 4×3×2×1, which is 4! (Look at how excited that statement is). 

So, by definition, if you have n distinct objects and you want to arrange them all in order, there are n! ways to do it. And if you play around with the function a bit, you may have noticed that n! can grow very fast. Sorting 5 people would have 5! = 120 ways to do it, but 8 people would have 8! = 40,320 ways to do it! If you were to do 1 arrangement every minute, all 5! ways for 5 people would take only 2 hours to do them all, but the 8! ways for 8 people would take 28 days to do them all!!! That is a big difference!

This is also another reason why 0! = 1. If you have no objects to arrange, then the total number of ways to arrange it is 1, which is just the current state! Mind-boggling, isn’t it?

> To summarise:
>
> - The factorial of a non-negative integer $n$ is the product of all the consecutive positive integers from $n$ to 1, i.e. $n!=n(n-1)(n-2)...(3)(2)(1)$, with the special case of $0!=1$
>
> - The number of ways to arrange all n distinct objects in order is equal to $n!$


But what if we only want to arrange some people in our group? What if we only want to arrange 3 or 4 of the 6 people we have? Well, that’s where permutation comes in.

Permutation Progress
Permutation is where you not only want to arrange the number of distinct objects you have in order, but you also want to arrange only a possible number from the many you have in order. For n distinct objects, the number of distinct arrangements you can have with r of them is nPr, commonly read as n permute/permutate r. 



For example, say you have a class of 5 students and you only want 2 of them to step out, with one to stand on the left and one on the right. The number of ways to permute (choose and arrange) this is 5P2. But how do you calculate 5P2? 

Well, you could of course use a calculator, as most calculators have that function. But there’s another way of calculating it, with the use of factorials. nPr is also the same as n! divided by $(n-r)!$. 



This is because in total there are $n!$ ways to arrange $n$ distinct objects (in fact, nPn is just n!), but because you only want to arrange r of them, you remove the (n-r)! ways of arrangements, so you divide them accordingly. So for the example above, the number of ways to arrange 2 of 5 students is 5P2 = 5!/3! = 20. This is equivalent to just multiplying the first r terms of the factorial of n, since it is akin to picking objects to fit in order, so for the example, the left side has 5 possible candidates, and after filling that the right side has 4 remaining possible students to fill it, so the total number of ways would be 5*4=20.

> To summarise:
>
> - The number of ways or permutations of arrangements of r out of n distinct objects in order is denoted as nPr, read as n permute r
>
> - $nPr=\frac{n!}{(n-r)!}=n(n-1)(n-2)...(n-r+1)$


But what if we just want to group people, not caring about how they’re arranged? Well, there’s a function for that too.

Let’s Choose Some Choices
If you have noticed from Permutation, the number of ways it gives for arrangements are a lot, but this is because permutation considers every unique arrangement there is. ABC is different from CBA. However, Combination is much more slack, considering only how you can group distinct objects from a number of choices. ABC is the same as CBA, it’s still the same group with the same members. For n distinct objects, the number of ways to group r of them is nCr, commonly read as n choose r. 



Let’s use the same example from the permutation section, but instead of assigning the 2 students to a left and right seat, you just want to choose 2 students from the 5. The number of ways to choose them is 5C2. But now, how then is 5C2 calculated? 
Again, the calculator can do the work for you. But by using the handy factorial again, nCr is the same as n! divided by (n-r)! AND r!. 



Because apart from only wanting r of them, the r of them can be permuted into r! ways, and because the combination function is just selecting without care for specific arrangements, r! Is divided to get rid of the extra arrangements. So for the example above, the number of ways to choose 2 of 5 students is 5C2 = 5!/(2!3!) = 10. In fact, permutation can be seen as the combination of r distinct objects from n of them, with the r of them permuting themselves into r! ways. Another way to write this is nPr = nCr × r!. So you don’t really need to use permutation to get the arrangements of r from n distinct objects; you could just find the combination of r of them and then multiply by the r! ways they can permute. 

To summarise:

- The number of ways to pick or choose r out of n distinct objects is denoted as nCr, read as n choose r

- nCr=n!/r!(n-r)!


But for combination, factorial isn’t the only way to find an answer. There’s also a fancy shape of numbers that can help give you the answer, and you can also produce it yourself!

Pascal’s Triangle
First, at the very top and middle of where you want to ‘draw’ this shape, write a 1. Then below it, write two 1s so that the 3 1s are like a pyramid. Now here’s the fun part: every next row of the shape you draw, write a 1 on each end, but the numbers in between them are now the sum of the two numbers above it. So for the 3rd row, the numbers would be 121, since above it was 11 and you them both together. The 4th row would be 1331, 5th row would be 14641 and so on. An animated diagram below shows the procedure. What you would get if you keep on doing it as much as you want, would be a triangle as shown in the second diagram.

      

This is known famously as Pascal’s Triangle. But how does it help with combination? Well, for nCr, the answer for it can be found in the (n+1)th row from the top and the (r+1)th number from the row, either from left or right, because of its symmetrical form. For example, for 5C2, the answer is in the 6th most top row and the 3rd number in it, which is 10, just like in the previous section with factorials!

But if you have noticed since the first section on factorial, I’ve kept using the word ‘distinct’. This is because of this important fact: Permutation and Combination cannot be directly used if the objects are not distinct. Even if two objects are the same, P&C cannot be directly applied.

So how do we go about arranging identical objects?

Repetition Problems
Let’s use the glorious 4-letters in History as an example: USSR. How many different ways can you arrange it? Well, using permutation, the number of ways would be 4! = 24, right? Wrong. This is because both S in USSR are the same. If the letters were US1S2R, then that would be true, because US1S2R would be different from US2S1R. But with both S identical to each other, USSR is still USSR (Stalin approved). With identical objects or letters, permutation will overcount the number of ways. So how do we go about finding the exact number? Well, note that in the 4! ways of permuting the letters, there are ways that just swaps the 2 identical letters with each other, giving forth 2! extra permutations. So, the exact number of different ways to arrange the letters would be 4!/2! = 12.

To generalise this, for n objects or letters where a of them are identical to each other, b of them are identical to each other and so on, the number of different ways to permute them would be n!/(a!b!c!...), where a+b+c+...=n. For example, the number of ways to permute CABBAGE would be 7!/(2!2!) = 1260 since there are 2 As and 2 Bs.



So, we now know how to settle permutations with repeated and same objects. But did you know that arrangements are important as well? Permuting things in a group or in a row is simple enough, but there’s an arrangement that will put your head in a spin.

Going in Circles
In your lifetime you would have gone to some wedding dinner, birthday dinner, or just some fancy restaurant to eat. Even if you haven’t, dinner back home stands the same. At some point in time, you would have sat around a circular table. But why is circular arrangement significant enough to have its own sub-section in this article? Well, circular permutation isn’t as simple as you might think. But formula-wise, it is simple once you grasp it.

Let’s say 4 people NSEW went to a restaurant and sat at a circular table with identical seats. How many different ways can you arrange them? Well, your first instinct could be to just factorial them, and you wouldn’t be wrong. With 4 seats, if one takes this seat, then the 3 can only choose from the other 3 seats and so on. But this is for seats in a row. NSWE and ENSW would be different in a row, but around a circle, as you can see in the diagram, they are the same. This is because in a circle, you can rotate the arrangements, but however you look at it the position is still the same: If N was on S’s right and E was on S’s left, no matter how many rotations you do, their relative positions to each other are the same. 



But then how much have we overcounted?  Well, for 4 people, you can see that rotating the seats 4 times in a certain direction gives the same placements, as well as bring you back to the original placing. So for 4 people, the total distinct ways to permute them would be 4!/4 = 3! = (4-1)!. To generalise this, for n objects to be permuted around a circle, there are n times more repeated placings, and so the total number of distinct permutations is n!/n = (n-1)!. 


So now you know the main gist of P&C. From knowing how to make specific arrangements, to just grouping objects, back to making specific arrangements but around a circle. While all this may seem very unnecessary, P&C helps a lot with trying to arrange things. For example, it can tell you the number of passwords you can create from a given set of letters and numbers, so you can make a secure password, since there would be too many permutations for even a hacker to bother trying to get. And as always, thanks for reading.
