Did you know that Excel, the app you use to store data and do programming and calculations in, isn’t actually as big as you thought it was? Sure, you would scroll down but it always seems that it will never end, right? Well, after scrolling much, it does.

The End (or rather the edge) of Excel,with a small message there for anyone who scrolls down to read it

As you can see from the picture, Excel ends at the 1,048,576th row and the XFD column. (But just a note, mine is Excel from 2007 so maybe it has more in the latest versions. If you’re bored why not scroll down yours and tell me where it ends, and if it ends where my ends!) But then a question came to my mind: Since I’ve reached the corner, is the whole Excel sheet a perfect square sheet or a lame rectangular one? Is the XFD column equal to the 1,048,576th column? And why that number? Well, let’s do the math.

If you’ve used Excel before, you would know that after you reach the Z column it doesn’t end there: the AA column pops out, then AB, AC, AD… until it reaches BA and starts over again. What does it mean? Well for every letter of the alphabet, all 26 of them, they are each grouped to a set of letters as well. And then another, and another. People with a keen eye and have abit about number systems knows that we’re dealing with a base-26 number system, except now they’re letters instead of numbers. So after Z, it moves to another digit place to the left and start again. Each place corresponds to a power of 26. So first place are the 1s, second place 26s, third place (26^2)s and so on. So for XFD, there are X number of 26^2=676s, F number of 26s and D number of 1s. So the total number of columns comes up to 24(676)+6(26)+4(1)=16,384 columns! (Since X=24, F=6 and D=4) So it isn’t a square excel sheet, but let’s not fret. Now let us see why these numbers are so specifically used. (Fun fact: I did the calculations, and the 1,048,576th column is the BGQCV column)

By prime factorisation of the numbers 1,048,576 and 16,384, we get 2^20 and 2^14 respectively. Both are perfect powers of 2! Which means they can be perfectly represented as numbers in binary, starting with a 1, followed by a trail of 0s! And so Math has again shown to infiltrate another field of study: Computer Science. Both fields are closely linked. Technology helps Mathematicians with their simulations, while Mathematicians help Technology by coming up with new ways of storing and compressing data in a device. Just remember that back then, a thumbdrive could only hold about 16 to 32GB of space. But now, a micro-card the size of your fingertips can hold up to 1TB!! Who knows, maybe next time, we could even create a device as small as our fingers, being able to hold up to 100 times the amount of storage today. And just like us, as we grow, our brain takes in more and more information, a storage space with no bounds. Maybe, WE are the future of technology. And as always, thanks for reading.
